# DataMining-PCA
Measuring Variance Explained by a PCA Model
This notebook will show how to measure the amount of variance that can be explained by the top  𝑘  principal components in a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) model. This technique is used to pick the number of lower dimensional space dimensions when performing dimensionality reduction using PCA.

For the purposes of this demonstration, we will use the wine dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, found at https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Wine. This demo was inspired by Sebastian Raschka's demo found at https://plot.ly/ipython-notebooks/principal-component-analysis/.

Just as there are multiple methods to compute a PCA model, we will show two different ways to measure the percent of explained variance in the model. This percentage is computed from the eigenvalues obtained after the eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix step in PCA. In short, the eigenvectors with the highest associated absolute eigenvalues are those that account for the most variance in the data. As a result, when building the PCA lower-dimensional data, we choose the  𝑘  principal components with the highest associated absolute eigenvalues, in non-increasing value order. By normalizing the vector of absolute eigenvalues with the L-1 norm, we obtain, for each feature, the percentage of the overall variance expained by that feature. Then, we obtain the percent variance expained by the chosen set of features by suming up the individual percent values for the chosen features. The vector of eigenvalues can also be easily recovered from the sigular values obtained from the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the original centered matrix.

Data pre-processing
Standardization makes features in the original feature space be compatible with each other with regards to the measurement scale. This is important in many Data Mining and Machine Learning analyses, and especially for the PCA, which aims to preserve variance. If there is significant difference in measurement scales between features (e.g., one feature is measured in mm and all others in m), the transformation will mainly pick up on the variance produced by some of the features and miss out of the more minute differences in the others.
